# Cross-discipline teaching in data analysis

## Abstract

Over the last few years there has been a radical shift in the teaching of data
analysis, from traditional statistics courses, to methods associated with
"data science".   Data science is a movement that emphasizes the importance of
computation and algorithms in the analysis of all types of data.   This type
of teaching brings with it several large benefits for collaborative learning.
It makes data analysis accessible to students that have minimal interest or
training in mathematics, by replacing mathematical methods with simple
algorithms, that exploit the power of modern computers, and are much easier to
teach and learn.   These algorithms lend themselves to many kinds of data,
making it possible to teach with data across many disciplines.  As an example,
the current "Foundations of Data Science" undergraduate course in Berkeley
takes students from all disciplines, with no requirements for computing or
mathematics, and teaches using data including novels in plain text from
Project Gutenburg, gender differences in US census data, blood test measures
in patients with kidney disease, and house prices in Iowa.  I will demonstrate
the technology that makes this kind of teaching practical, and show how it can
be used for analysis of data sets from diverse academic fields.  I will show
how these methods can be used to teach deep understanding of statistical
inference using little or no mathematics.

## Licenses

Unless otherwise specified, all files are copyright me, Matthew Brett, and are
also covered by [Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International Licence (CC BY
4.0)](http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0).

*   `mona_lisa.jpg` is a public domain image from
    `https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Mona_Lisa,_by_Leonardo_da_Vinci,_from_C2RMF_retouched.jpg`.
*   `images/sexiest_job.png` is a screen shot from
    https://hbr.org/2012/10/data-scientist-the-sexiest-job-of-the-21st-century
    and appears to be copyright the Harvard Business Review.
*   `images/propublica.png` is a screen shot from
    https://www.propublica.org/article/machine-bias-risk-assessments-in-criminal-sentencing
    and appears to be copyright Julia Angwin, Jeff Larson, Surya Mattu and
    Lauren Kirchner, ProPublica
*   `images/ptolemaic.png` is a screen shot from
    https://escholarship.org/uc/item/6hb3k0nz.  It may be copyright George W.
    Cobb.
*   `images/Weapons_of_Math_Destruction.jpg` from
    https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/en/0/0b/Weapons_of_Math_Destruction.jpg;
    the front cover art for the book "Weapons of Math Destruction". The book
    cover art copyright is believed to belong to the publisher or the cover
    artist.
